README.md, before:

# pyworkers
PyWorkers is a (relatively) small library wrapping and extending standard `threading` and `multiprocessing` libraries to provide things such as:
 - uniform API,
 - support for both graceful and forceful termination,
 - out-of-the-box support for running the target function multiple times,
 - lightweight support for RPC.

See the following sections for more details:
 - [Motivation and basic functionality](#motivation-and-basic-functionality)
 - [Requirements](#requirements)
 - [Installation](#installation)
 - [Generating documentation](#generating-documentation)
 - [Usage examples](#usage-examples)

## Motivation and basic functionality
Both `threading` and `multiprocessing` are great standard python packages enabling developers to quickly create and manage parallel applications by running different parts of their code in separate threads and processes respectively.
This is done with convenient API which mostly remains consistent between them.
However, as the libraries are designed to provide relatively low-level functionality, in order to be suitable for as many use-cases as possible, some things are left unaddressed.
PyWorkers tries to provide higher-level abstraction specialized towards running expensive functions which may take significant time to finish (in terms of hours) and potentially become unresponsive during their execution.
In order to do that and maximize usage of available computational resources, the library includes functionality allowing its users to seamlessly interchange and mix threads, processes and remote processes (RPC) as different ways of parallelizing their workloads, as well as enhances managing them.
Unlike `multiprocessing.dummy`, which also tries to provide uniform API between threads and processes, PyWorkers extends it by supporting remote execution and improves by implementing the exact same set of methods between all three types of workers (e.g. `DummyProcess` from `multiprocessing` does not support `terminate`, threads and processes use different names for their identifiers - `ident` and `pid` respectively - etc.).

The following is a quick summary of all the enhancements the library provides.

### Uniform API
Each worker, regardless of its underlying running mechanism, implements the same set of methods and attributes: `wait`, `terminate`, `is_alive`, `host`, `pid`, `tid`, `id`, `close` (and others) while at the same time trying to make sure their behaviour is consistent with other implementations.

For more details please see the API documentation.

### Graceful termination
`terminate` is available as a way of abnormally finishing execution of a worker. Unlike its relative from `multiprocessing`, the function provided by this library will first try to gracefully finish execution of the target function by raising a `WorkerTerminateError` exception in the target worker, thus allowing it to release all allocated resources etc. The time a worker is given to finish can be controlled by `timeout` parameter - if the worker hasn't finished by the time it passes, the function will then switch to forceful termination using `os.kill` with `SIGTERM` signal on Linux or `TerminateProcess` on Windows.


### Out-of-the-box support for consumers (persistent workers)
In addition to running the target function once (like in the standard libraries), PyWorkers includes a set of specialized classes which make it easier to run the function multiple times, processing incoming arguments in a streaming manner.
This type of execution is primarily useful when processing data using the producer-consumer paradigm and is conveniently supported by the means of `Pool` class (similar to the one from `multiprocessing` package).
Unlike the standard package, PyWorkers exposes consumer classes directly, making them usable in contexts where `Pool` object is not desired.
Also, the pool supports different workers types mixed together and, in case when termination of workers is requested, by default tries to soft-terminate them first (following semantics of `terminate` as implemented in the library).


### Lightweight RPC
TODO

## Requirements
 - Python3.6

No 3rd-party packages are used to provide core functionality, only standard `threading`, `multiprocessing` (including `multiprocessing.connection`), `socket`, `os`, `signal`, `pickle` and others.

`gitpython` is optional and provides additional versioning information if using the package via developer-mode installation with pip (see below).

### Tested with:
 - Ubuntu 18.04
 - Windows 10
 - WSL running Ubuntu 18.04

## Installation
Clone this repo, then using your desired version of `pip` run:
```bash
pip install .
```
from the root folder of this repo. If not using any environment virtualization tools, run the above command using `sudo` or with an extra `--user` argument passed to `pip` in order to install it in your user's local directory.

The above command will install the package by copying it to the python's `site-packages` folder - therefore, the installed version will not be synchronized with the changes you make in the cloned repo. In other words, each time you make changes, you will have to re-run the `pip install` command to make those changes visible in the installed package.

Alternatively, the package can be installed in a *developer mode* using the `-e` switch:
```bash
pip install -e .
```

## Generating documentation
> **Note:** The documentation is still in the early phase.
> Although quite a lot of thing has already been documented, there are some which are still missing, formatting might be broken at some places, and putting it all together might also require some extra work.

To automatically generate API documentation for the library, make sure `sphinx` and `sphinx_rtd_theme` are installed first.
You can easily install them with `pip`:
```bash
pip install sphinx sphinx_rtd_theme
```

> **Note:** `sphinx_rtd_theme` is only required if you want to use the readthedocs theme (the default one for this project).
> You can change the theme used by modifying your `docs/source/conf.py` file.

After installing `sphinx`, simply go to `docs/` and execute `make html`.
Your newly generated documentation should be available at `docs/build/index.html`.

## Usage examples
> **Tip:** You can find these examples under `docs/examples`!

```python
from pyworkers.thread import ThreadWorker
from pyworkers.process import ProcessWorker
from pyworkers.remote import RemoteWorker

def foo(x):
    return x**2

if __name__ == '__main__':
    tw = ThreadWorker(target=foo, args=(1,))
    tw.wait()

    pw = ProcessWorker(target=foo, args=(2,))
    pw.wait()

    rw = RemoteWorker(target=foo, args=(3,), host=('127.0.0.1', 6006))
    rw.wait()

    print(tw.result, pw.result, rw.result)
```

Should print `1, 4, 9`.

Please note that there's no extra `start` method which needs to be called after a worker is created. Instead, the constructor automatically spawns a worker to make sure that the object is valid (e.g. pid) as soon as the it is created.

> **Note:** The remote worker in this example assumes that there is a remote server running locally on the TCP port 6006. This server can be created programmatically by including the following code (creates a child process):
> ```python
> ...
> from pyworkers.remote_server import spawn_server
> 
> if __name__ == '__main__':
>     server = spawn_server(('127.0.0.1', 6006)) # returns ProcessWorker!
>     try:
>         ...
>     finally:
>         server.terminate()
> ```
> or run as a standalone process by executing the `pyworkers.remote_server` module:
> ```bash
> python3 -m pyworkers.remote_server -v --addr 127.0.0.1 --port 6006
> ```
> It is also possible to run the server programatically in the calling thread by using `RemoteServer` class from `pyworkers.remote_server` directly, instead of using it via `spawn_server` and `RemoteServerProcess`, but care should be taken when doing so as `accept` (which is called on the server socket) is tricky to interrupt.

The same can be achieved without necessity of hardcoding the workers' types as one could instead use values from the `WorkerType` enum together with a factory classmethod `Worker.create`.

```python
from pyworkers.worker import Worker, WorkerType

def foo(x):
    return x**2

if __name__ == '__main__':
    workers = []
    for wtype, x in zip(WorkerType, range(1, 4)):
        kwargs = {
            'target': foo,
            'args': (x, )
        }
        if wtype is WorkerType.REMOTE:
            kwargs['host'] = ('127.0.0.1', 6006)

        worker = Worker.create(wtype, **kwargs)
        workers.append(worker)

    results = []
    for worker in workers:
        worker.wait()
        results.append(worker.result)

    print(results)
```

The code above should print the same result as the previous one.

> **Note:** the `Worker` class is the base class for all workers types.
> The shared API is defined within it.

### Handling errors

If an error happens when running the target function, the `result` field of the worker which failed will be set to `None` and instead `error` will hold the exception object which caused the failure.
For example:

```python
from pyworkers.process import ProcessWorker

def suicide(x):
    raise RuntimeError('How is one supposed to live on this miserable world where x = {}?'.format(x))

if __name__ == '__main__':
    pw = ProcessWorker(target=suicide, args=(2,))
    pw.wait()
    print(pw.result)
    print(pw.has_error)
    print(pw.error)
```

The above code should print:
```
<Exception reported from the child process>
None
True
How is one supposed to live on this miserable world where x = 2?
```

> **Note:** Although in almost all cases if an error happened the `error` field of a worker should be not None, it is possible for the worker to die due to a reason which is not reported via a Python exception.
> In that case, `has_error` will be set to `True` but `error` can be `None` (example of such situation could be when a child process is killed with SIGKILL signal on Linux).
> Therefore, it is better to test `has_error` field instead of `error` if a guarantee about erroneous exit is desired.

### Persistent Workers
If it is desired to run the target function multiple times without the overhead of creating new workers every time, it is possible to use their persistent variations.

Persistent workers take the target function as an argument when they are created (like standard workers) but will wait for the incoming arguments until they are `close`d, returning results to the caller via a dedicated queue/pipe/socket.

Just like with ordinary workers, it is possible to create persistent workers using their classes directly (`PersistentThreadWorker`, `PersistentProcessWorker` and `PersistentRemoteWorker`) or by using the factory classmethod `PersistentWorker.create`.
For example:

```python
from pyworkers.persistent import PersistentWorker, WorkerType

import itertools

def foo(x):
    return x**2

if __name__ == '__main__':
    workers = []
    for wtype in WorkerType:
        kwargs = { 'target': foo }
        if wtype is WorkerType.REMOTE:
            kwargs['host'] = ('127.0.0.1', 6006)

        worker = PersistentWorker.create(wtype, **kwargs)
        workers.append(worker)

    for worker, x in zip(itertools.cycle(workers), range(10)):
        worker.enqueue(x)

    results = []
    for worker in workers:
        worker.wait()
        print(worker.result, list(worker.results_iter()))
```

Expected output:
```
4 [0, 9, 36, 81]
3 [1, 16, 49]
3 [4, 25, 64]
```

### Pool
TODO

> **Note:** For more example, consider looking at the tests defined in the `tests/` subfolder!

Commit message:

[Docs] Add a section about running tests in README

README.md, after:

# pyworkers
PyWorkers is a (relatively) small library wrapping and extending standard `threading` and `multiprocessing` libraries to provide things such as:
 - uniform API,
 - support for both graceful and forceful termination,
 - out-of-the-box support for running the target function multiple times,
 - lightweight support for RPC.

See the following sections for more details:
 - [Motivation and basic functionality](#motivation-and-basic-functionality)
 - [Requirements](#requirements)
 - [Installation](#installation)
 - [Generating documentation](#generating-documentation)
 - [Usage examples](#usage-examples)

## Motivation and basic functionality
Both `threading` and `multiprocessing` are great standard python packages enabling developers to quickly create and manage parallel applications by running different parts of their code in separate threads and processes respectively.
This is done with convenient API which mostly remains consistent between them.
However, as the libraries are designed to provide relatively low-level functionality, in order to be suitable for as many use-cases as possible, some things are left unaddressed.
PyWorkers tries to provide higher-level abstraction specialized towards running expensive functions which may take significant time to finish (in terms of hours) and potentially become unresponsive during their execution.
In order to do that and maximize usage of available computational resources, the library includes functionality allowing its users to seamlessly interchange and mix threads, processes and remote processes (RPC) as different ways of parallelizing their workloads, as well as enhances managing them.
Unlike `multiprocessing.dummy`, which also tries to provide uniform API between threads and processes, PyWorkers extends it by supporting remote execution and improves by implementing the exact same set of methods between all three types of workers (e.g. `DummyProcess` from `multiprocessing` does not support `terminate`, threads and processes use different names for their identifiers - `ident` and `pid` respectively - etc.).

The following is a quick summary of all the enhancements the library provides.

### Uniform API
Each worker, regardless of its underlying running mechanism, implements the same set of methods and attributes: `wait`, `terminate`, `is_alive`, `host`, `pid`, `tid`, `id`, `close` (and others) while at the same time trying to make sure their behaviour is consistent with other implementations.

For more details please see the API documentation.

### Graceful termination
`terminate` is available as a way of abnormally finishing execution of a worker. Unlike its relative from `multiprocessing`, the function provided by this library will first try to gracefully finish execution of the target function by raising a `WorkerTerminateError` exception in the target worker, thus allowing it to release all allocated resources etc. The time a worker is given to finish can be controlled by `timeout` parameter - if the worker hasn't finished by the time it passes, the function will then switch to forceful termination using `os.kill` with `SIGTERM` signal on Linux or `TerminateProcess` on Windows.


### Out-of-the-box support for consumers (persistent workers)
In addition to running the target function once (like in the standard libraries), PyWorkers includes a set of specialized classes which make it easier to run the function multiple times, processing incoming arguments in a streaming manner.
This type of execution is primarily useful when processing data using the producer-consumer paradigm and is conveniently supported by the means of `Pool` class (similar to the one from `multiprocessing` package).
Unlike the standard package, PyWorkers exposes consumer classes directly, making them usable in contexts where `Pool` object is not desired.
Also, the pool supports different workers types mixed together and, in case when termination of workers is requested, by default tries to soft-terminate them first (following semantics of `terminate` as implemented in the library).


### Lightweight RPC
TODO

## Requirements
 - Python3.6

No 3rd-party packages are used to provide core functionality, only standard `threading`, `multiprocessing` (including `multiprocessing.connection`), `socket`, `os`, `signal`, `pickle` and others.

`gitpython` is optional and provides additional versioning information if using the package via developer-mode installation with pip (see below).

### Tested with:
 - Ubuntu 18.04
 - Windows 10
 - WSL running Ubuntu 18.04

## Installation
Clone this repo, then using your desired version of `pip` run:
```bash
pip install .
```
from the root folder of this repo. If not using any environment virtualization tools, run the above command using `sudo` or with an extra `--user` argument passed to `pip` in order to install it in your user's local directory.

The above command will install the package by copying it to the python's `site-packages` folder - therefore, the installed version will not be synchronized with the changes you make in the cloned repo. In other words, each time you make changes, you will have to re-run the `pip install` command to make those changes visible in the installed package.

Alternatively, the package can be installed in a *developer mode* using the `-e` switch:
```bash
pip install -e .
```

## Generating documentation
> **Note:** The documentation is still in the early phase.
> Although quite a lot of thing has already been documented, there are some which are still missing, formatting might be broken at some places, and putting it all together might also require some extra work.

To automatically generate API documentation for the library, make sure `sphinx` and `sphinx_rtd_theme` are installed first.
You can easily install them with `pip`:
```bash
pip install sphinx sphinx_rtd_theme
```

> **Note:** `sphinx_rtd_theme` is only required if you want to use the readthedocs theme (the default one for this project).
> You can change the theme used by modifying your `docs/source/conf.py` file.

After installing `sphinx`, simply go to `docs/` and execute `make html`.
Your newly generated documentation should be available at `docs/build/index.html`.

## Running tests
The project uses standard `unittest` Python package for testing, the tests are stored within `tests/` subdirectory and follow the `*_test.py` naming convention.
The easiest way to run them is to navigate towards the root directory of this repo and from there run:
```bash
python3 -m unittest discover -v -s "." -p "*_test.py"
```
Alternatively, one can use VS Code with the provided `settings.json` from `.vscode` folder which configures the tests to be runnable from within the tests tab inside a VS Code window (using an analogical command to the above).
Each test file should also be runnable by its own.

## Usage examples
> **Tip:** You can find these examples under `docs/examples`!

```python
from pyworkers.thread import ThreadWorker
from pyworkers.process import ProcessWorker
from pyworkers.remote import RemoteWorker

def foo(x):
    return x**2

if __name__ == '__main__':
    tw = ThreadWorker(target=foo, args=(1,))
    tw.wait()

    pw = ProcessWorker(target=foo, args=(2,))
    pw.wait()

    rw = RemoteWorker(target=foo, args=(3,), host=('127.0.0.1', 6006))
    rw.wait()

    print(tw.result, pw.result, rw.result)
```

Should print `1, 4, 9`.

Please note that there's no extra `start` method which needs to be called after a worker is created. Instead, the constructor automatically spawns a worker to make sure that the object is valid (e.g. pid) as soon as the it is created.

> **Note:** The remote worker in this example assumes that there is a remote server running locally on the TCP port 6006. This server can be created programmatically by including the following code (creates a child process):
> ```python
> ...
> from pyworkers.remote_server import spawn_server
> 
> if __name__ == '__main__':
>     server = spawn_server(('127.0.0.1', 6006)) # returns ProcessWorker!
>     try:
>         ...
>     finally:
>         server.terminate()
> ```
> or run as a standalone process by executing the `pyworkers.remote_server` module:
> ```bash
> python3 -m pyworkers.remote_server -v --addr 127.0.0.1 --port 6006
> ```
> It is also possible to run the server programatically in the calling thread by using `RemoteServer` class from `pyworkers.remote_server` directly, instead of using it via `spawn_server` and `RemoteServerProcess`, but care should be taken when doing so as `accept` (which is called on the server socket) is tricky to interrupt.

The same can be achieved without necessity of hardcoding the workers' types as one could instead use values from the `WorkerType` enum together with a factory classmethod `Worker.create`.

```python
from pyworkers.worker import Worker, WorkerType

def foo(x):
    return x**2

if __name__ == '__main__':
    workers = []
    for wtype, x in zip(WorkerType, range(1, 4)):
        kwargs = {
            'target': foo,
            'args': (x, )
        }
        if wtype is WorkerType.REMOTE:
            kwargs['host'] = ('127.0.0.1', 6006)

        worker = Worker.create(wtype, **kwargs)
        workers.append(worker)

    results = []
    for worker in workers:
        worker.wait()
        results.append(worker.result)

    print(results)
```

The code above should print the same result as the previous one.

> **Note:** the `Worker` class is the base class for all workers types.
> The shared API is defined within it.

### Handling errors

If an error happens when running the target function, the `result` field of the worker which failed will be set to `None` and instead `error` will hold the exception object which caused the failure.
For example:

```python
from pyworkers.process import ProcessWorker

def suicide(x):
    raise RuntimeError('How is one supposed to live on this miserable world where x = {}?'.format(x))

if __name__ == '__main__':
    pw = ProcessWorker(target=suicide, args=(2,))
    pw.wait()
    print(pw.result)
    print(pw.has_error)
    print(pw.error)
```

The above code should print:
```
<Exception reported from the child process>
None
True
How is one supposed to live on this miserable world where x = 2?
```

> **Note:** Although in almost all cases if an error happened the `error` field of a worker should be not None, it is possible for the worker to die due to a reason which is not reported via a Python exception.
> In that case, `has_error` will be set to `True` but `error` can be `None` (example of such situation could be when a child process is killed with SIGKILL signal on Linux).
> Therefore, it is better to test `has_error` field instead of `error` if a guarantee about erroneous exit is desired.

### Persistent Workers
If it is desired to run the target function multiple times without the overhead of creating new workers every time, it is possible to use their persistent variations.

Persistent workers take the target function as an argument when they are created (like standard workers) but will wait for the incoming arguments until they are `close`d, returning results to the caller via a dedicated queue/pipe/socket.

Just like with ordinary workers, it is possible to create persistent workers using their classes directly (`PersistentThreadWorker`, `PersistentProcessWorker` and `PersistentRemoteWorker`) or by using the factory classmethod `PersistentWorker.create`.
For example:

```python
from pyworkers.persistent import PersistentWorker, WorkerType

import itertools

def foo(x):
    return x**2

if __name__ == '__main__':
    workers = []
    for wtype in WorkerType:
        kwargs = { 'target': foo }
        if wtype is WorkerType.REMOTE:
            kwargs['host'] = ('127.0.0.1', 6006)

        worker = PersistentWorker.create(wtype, **kwargs)
        workers.append(worker)

    for worker, x in zip(itertools.cycle(workers), range(10)):
        worker.enqueue(x)

    results = []
    for worker in workers:
        worker.wait()
        print(worker.result, list(worker.results_iter()))
```

Expected output:
```
4 [0, 9, 36, 81]
3 [1, 16, 49]
3 [4, 25, 64]
```

### Pool
TODO

> **Note:** For more example, consider looking at the tests defined in the `tests/` subfolder!
